00:00

[Eben]: Спасибо всем. Итак, меня зовут Eben Upton, в Соединённом Кроолевстве я занимаюсь штукой, которая называется Raspberry Pi. Да, мы делаем маленькие компьютеры для детей.

Сейчас я стараюсь не причинять смерти окружающим людям презентациями PowerPoint, но... Вчера был день числа Пи, и у меня нет сил сдержаться, - а, что же мне надо сделать?

00:26 [Из-за экрана]: Разрешение вашего экрана должно быть 1024x768; а не 800x600.

[Eben] Чёрт побери.

[Аудитория смеётся]

[Eben] С Raspberry Pi такого не могло бы случиться.

[Громкий смех]

[Eben] Ох, Windows 7, что же мне делать?..

[Смех]

[Eben] Так, небольшая пауза, может быть пауза побольше, или... - о! давайте посмотрим. See, so it's thinking 10 by 7. Вы можете переключить на главный экран, и посмотреть, что произойдёт?

01:03 [Из-за экрана] Неплохо.

[Eben]: Хорошо, правда? Мы молодцы. Выдающаяся работа. Теперь вернёмся к презентации.

So, um, I couldn't resist doing a moderately pi themed talk, a talk themed around everyone's favourite irrational number. So what I'm going to try and do, we'll start off by talking about 1. Um, I'd like to talk to you for a few minutes about what Raspberry Pi is, it's like one big story - what Raspberry Pi is, why we're doing it.

Для меня, Raspberry Pi уже является 7 летним приключением, которое началось для меня со звонка руководителю НИР Кебриджского университета. Сейчас задача руководителя НИР - организовывать обучение в бакалавриате в одном из тридцати колледжей, и также обеспечить приток бакалавров в будущем. Таким образом, каждый декабрь мы получаем много новых учеников высшей школы, - ах да, мы привлекаем множество студентов к участию в нашем курсе.

Итак, когда я пришёл в Кембридж в 1996-м, на науки о компьютерах {trackpass?} вполне обычный конкурс около 6:1, и чтобы получить своё место, вам нужно было прорываться, ох, вам нужно было выбить тех 5 ребят и вон тех 5, которые часто весьма и весьма неплохо разбирались в компьютерах. Это были те, кто программировал, может быть, лет с 10. Те, у кого были собственные Commodore 64, или Timex, или если речь идёт о Соединённом Королевстве, машины наподобие BCC Microcomputer, именно те, с которыми вырос и я. Может быть они приобрели эти компьютеры для игр, а может быть им купили или сделали сами родители, для домашних заданий.

В любом случае, у всех этих компьютеров была одна общая черта - когда вы их включали, раздавалось "би!" (мы этого ждали), и затем вы оставались перед приглашением языка программирования, и первая вещь, которую необходимо было сделать прежде чем поиграть в игрушке или запустить текстовый процессор для домашних заданий - the first thing you had to choose to do was to choose *not* to program the computer. And what this meant was that everyone of my age in the UK who had any aptitude for computing or any interest in computing had a chance to discover that they had that interest, and they had a platform generally in their bedrooms that they could hack on for many hours a night, that they could use to develop those skills. Это значило, что практически каждый, кого я знал в школе, по крайней мере знал такую программу в две строчки:

10 PRINT "I AM THE BEST"
20 GOTO 10

... или что-нибудь менее пристойное, затем шёл в местный компьютерный магазин, забивал код во все компьютеры и, нажимая "Enter" на всех машинах, на полном ходу выбегал прочь. Восьмидесятые годы были нехитрым временем, и мы развлекались как могли.

[Аудитория смеётся]

03:46 [Eben]: And the upshot of this was that at the university in Cambridge, we'd gotten fat and happy on this stream of incredibly intelligent, incredibly talented kids who came in the door at the age of 18 - the Cambridge course is fairly famous for having very short terms; the better the university in the UK the less time you actually spend there. Um, what this means is over the course of three years, we have 60 weeks of contact time to turn you from a high-school student into somebody who can start an english 3-year PHD programme. That meant it was extremely useful to us to be able to rely on a certain level of ability, and a certain level of knowledge when people came in the door, and in fact the first thing we had to do with a lot of these kids was we had to convince them that they didn't know everything. We had a fantastic tool called functional programming, standard ML for doing this.

04:30 [audience laughs]

[Eben]: Woo! Language wars!

[Апполдисменты]

[Eben]: And so we beat these kids (and I was one of those kids); the kids were beaten over the head for the first 8 weeks of the course, and when they were lying there whimpering, then we can start to teach them the things they need to know. [Смеётся] 

People absolutely need to know functional programming. Um, so [laughs], so by the time I went through the PHD programme and by the time I was interviewing people in 2005, the picture had changed radically. So we'd gone from having 500 applicants for our 80 or 90 places, to having more like 200-250. And while that's still a reasonable ratio, it was starting to get a little bit slim. It was starting to look like we might not be able to find out 80 or 90 kids. And while we were still able, and to this day we can still find 80 or 90 people to come and study on the course who are every bit as intelligent as those people were back in the mid-1990s, what they lack these days is they lack that built-in, kind of hacker knowledge of what the machine is doing. So we had to spend quite a lot of the start of our 60 weeks building these people up to a level that we'd previously been able to assume. 

So, back in 2006, a group of us at the university started to wonder why this had happened, and we started to wonder if there was anything we could do about it. And the theory that we came up with was that what had happened was that those 8-bit machines that we all had as children had gone away. That that ecosystem had been eaten from below by games consoles - games consoles are not only not programmable, but they are *designed* to not be programmable. Their business model forces them to be unprogrammable pieces of hardware because the platform holder needs to be able to recover the subsidy that they've applied to the platform. 

And then they'd been eaten from above by the PC. Now the PC is an awesomely programmable piece of hardware - it's, as a programming environment, far more sophisticated and user-friendly than the machines that we were used to in the 1980s. What had changed was the choice architecture. What had changed was if you get a PC, you have to choose to program the PC - you have to choose to go and get the tools, you have to choose to go and get the documentation. And that's a tiny little energy barrier, but it's a big enough energy barrier that it just chopped the legs off our pipeline of skilled applicants.

So we thought 'well, there's a niche, maybe we can make a thing to fit in this niche'. And we had an idea that the thing to fit in this niche, in kids' bedrooms, had to be four things: 

First of all, it obviously had to be programmable to be of use to us. 

Secondly, it had to be interesting - we had to remember that kids were buying these machines in the 1980s - I bought mine in the 1980s to play (well, I bought mine to program on) - but a lot of people bought their computers in order to play games on or to do their schoolwork on, so it had to be able to do something else. It had to not just be a programming device. For us what that meant - 'interesting' meant games, 'interesting' meant graphics, 'interesting' meant video.

Um, it had to be robust. We wanted something that was small and robust - something that could be shoved into a schoolbag and taken out of the schoolbag 100 times and not break. 

Finally we wanted to have something that was cheap. Now, we were aware that we were going to be asking people to go out and buy a particular piece of hardware in order to get this programming experience therefore we couldn't, we just could not make it expensive. We looked around and our idea of cheap was a school textbook - you can ask children to buy school textbooks. So we picked this $25 price, now that just shows that we know nothing about what school textbooks cost -

07:54 [audience laughter]

[eben] - ah, I think if we had had a more accurate understanding of what textbooks cost then we would have had a much easier job of the engineering over the following few years.

[more laughter]

[eben] Um, and so we set to pretty much this $25 - $25 came before anything else. So $25 is the price of the cheapest Raspberry Pi we call the model A Raspberry Pi. $25 came before pretty much anything else, and we spent a long time playing around trying to find what we could fit into $25. And the first things we were building were very very similar to Arduinos which I'm sure lots of people in the room have used. Um, based on microcontrollers. Um, you can get - you can get a really nice - you can actually trick a microcontroller into driving an old standard definition television, so you can get a really nice sort of 8-bit microcomputer experience out of an atmel/atmega microcontroller. But this failed a number of our tests. And the lovely thing about this is (and I built one of these myself) - the lovely thing about these platforms is that you can build them yourself on veroboard. You know, you can sit down on a rainy afternoon and at the end of the afternoon you can walk away with a computer. And it certainly meets the $25 goal. What it doesn't meet is this requirement that it should be interesting to children, right? It's interesting to me because I already know how to program and I like geeky toys. But it has to be interesting to children. So we kind of abandoned that idea.

About this time I went to work for a company called Broadcom, and I'm still a salaried employee of Broadcom although I spend most of my time doing this sort of thing now. Um, but, um, well I went to work for a company called Broadcom - Broadcom makes a lot of different chips for communications and stuff and one of the things that we make is chips for cellphones, and it turns out that I was struck by - and these cost about the same as microcontrollers - and I was sturck that if you are a cellphone company, what your ten dollars will buy you is very different from what your ten dollars will buy you if you go to Digikey, in the way of processing capabilities. And so this group of us, we started to look and we started to see whether we could build something on one of these platforms.

[09:44] In about 2008 we had in our hands, based on a mobile phone graphics processor that we'd developed in Cambridge, we had a device which we thought was almost good enough. This was a device which didn't have an open processor - it had a closed, proprietory RISC core in it. And we ported C Python to it. And we had what we thought was what we wanted all along, which was a machine that booted into a widely-known, popular educational programming language, in this case Python. And this thing just looked great. It hit our $25 price point, it could play 720p video, it had a nice powerful graphics processor on it, we'd arranged Python bindings for all of these features, it was a really fantastic little platform. And you know, we really thought this was a go. And so this group who'd been doing this informally got together and we said 'well let's start up a foundation to promote this' and we kicked around a lot of names - we came up with this name 'Raspberry Pi' in the end - the 'Pi' in 'Raspberry pi' is the 'Py' in 'Python', um, misspelled, so I've had to defend my spelling for the last 4-and-a-half years. We really thought that 'Pi' was going to make for a fantastic logo, and we have never used that possibility, but by the time we realised we weren't going to do that we'd frozen the name. 

So we were trundling along. But one of the problems I think we found was that we had to write everything ourselves - this was a very closed platform. Okay, we'd ported an open, well-known, popular interpretive language onto it, but we had to write everything ourselves - we had to write our own network drivers and our own SD card drivers and all this stuff, and so it wasn't quite there. And then we were very lucky that a couple of years later a version of broadly the same chip appeared that I had managed to cram an ARM11 into the corner of - there are advantages to being on the chip design team - 

[audience laughs]

[eben]: - 'we absolutely must have an ARM11 in this chip - for unspecified business reasons '

[more laughter, applause]

[eben]: ...and we got this chip back, and it was great, and we finally had the thing that we wanted, which was an almost completely - at least on the ARM side - an almost completely open platform; something that could run Linux, and that would mean that we could leverage this enormous investment that the community had made in developing a real operating system - a real operating system that you don't have to pay money for. 

But we were still thinking in a very parochial way - we still had this very parochial idea that what we were going to try and do was get our... The only thing we wanted to do was get our 250 computer science applicants at Cambridge per year. 250 computer science applicants, and maybe for the 80 or 90 that we let in to know a little bit of assembly language. That would have been a really great outcome. And because we were very nostalgic - I don't know how many of you have come across a machine called the BBC Microcomputer? This was the educational microcomputer of choice in the UK in the 1980s sponsored by the British Broadcasting Corporation - and because a number of us on the board at the foundation had a history with the BBC Micro and we were kindof romantic guys, we thought it would be kindof cool to put a BBC sticker on it, and we were going to call it the BBC Nano - we have this lovely brand with the Raspberry Pi that we never ever wanted, and we thought it would be great if we could call it the BBC Nano and we kept going to the BBC and asking if we could, you know - 'could we stick your logo on this?' and they kept saying no, and there were various complicated legal reasons why they had to say no, and our last attempt was in May of 2011 (so nearly 2 years ago), and we went to see a guy called Rory Cellan-Jones who is the senior technology correspondent for the BBC, and we said 'Hey, can we put the BBC logo on it?' and he said 'No' but what he did say then was 'Well I think it's a great idea though - can I take a video of one of you holding up a prototype and talking about the idea?' and so one of my colleagues, a guy called David Braben - one of my fellow trustees who - I don't know if any of you have played the computer game 'Elite'? Who've had your childhoods wasted by 'Elite' - that was David's fault. Um, and there's a 45-second video of him just standing up holding something that looks nothing like a Raspberry Pi and talking about the Raspberry Pi project.

It recieved 70,000 Youtube views in 2 days. And that was a great 2 days for me - I sat there at Broadcom, at work, and didn't do any work. I just sat there pressing F5.

[audience laughs]

13:48 [eben]: You've seen the episode of 'The Simpsons' where Homer gets his console at home and replaces his entire function with one of those nodding birds - I was just pressing F5. And my 'how popular are you' counter was going up and I was feeling great. And at the end of the second day, I went home and I was really buzzing and I sat down opposite my wife - my wife Liz - I sat down opposite her, for dinner, and we had this sudden 'oh, shit!' moment where we realised we'd promised 600,000 people we'd build them a $25 computer and we had no idea how to do it.

[audience laughs]

[eben]: And so 2011 for me was just like one storm of trying to figure out first of all, how we were going to do it at the price - you know, you add up the cost of the chips and it should be about right, but as soon as you start, you know - there are 180 components on a Raspberry Pi, and 2 of those are the chips - and those are the ones that I was thinking of when I was thinking $20-$25 but there's a lot of 1-cent components and 2-cent components and some 10-cent components on that board and that can really add up. So we spent a long time trying to figure out how to fight our way down to $25, or $35 for the one that we launched, which has ethernet and more USB on it. 

And towards the end of the year, we actually had something that we thought we could build at cost. And this was fantastic, and we thought about our 600,000 people and we thought 'well, most of those are rubberneckers, they don't actually want a Raspberry Pi', so what we'll do, we've got a brilliant business model - and I'd just finished an MBA, so I knew all about business models - I thought 'what a great business model - what we'll do is I'll scrape together some cash-' and we scraped together a quarter of a million dollars of capital to run this project - and that's enough to build 10,000 Raspberry Pis, and so what my great business model '-we'll build 10,000 Raspberry Pis, we'll put them on a website, like some sort of shop/store thing, people will buy them, and then after a few months, we'll have run out of our 10,000 Raspberry Pis, and we'll use the money that we got back to build some more Raspberry Pis, that'd be great!' - but then we were starting to get these danger signals - the traffic to our website was creeping up, and the number of people on our forums was creeping up, and to keep people interested - this thing boots from an SD card, right - so we put an SD card image online for people to download just to have a look at. Really buggy early beta software, bit of firmware - I think you could boot it in Qemu. And we had 50,000 downloads of that. And that was the point where we realised that the pool of fans so hardcore that they would download a buggy alpha operating system for a computer that they didn't know when they were able to get and that didn't exist yet was 50,000 people.

And then we thought 'you know, our 10,000 units might only last a week', and it takes 3 months to make them, so we'd be screwed. And then we were very lucky, because we found two companies in the UK - a company called Premier Farnell and a company called RS Components, and they trade out here as 'Newark' and 'Allied', so two very large component distributors, who shared our concern. You know, their customers are engineers - they have an interest in there being a strong engineering base in our country. And so they had the same concerns as us. And because they had these concerns, they were prepared to help us out - not simply by distributing these things, but by manufacturing them for us. So they were prepared to provide the capital, they were prepared to provide the logistics and the first-line customer support. And so we turned ourselves in January of last year, in the two months before launch, we turned ourselved from a very capital-constrained little foundation that was trying to build things into an IP licensing company. So we own the design of the board, and we own the brand and we licence those to those two companies, and they do the heavy lifting. And that's what's enabled us to scale. We were very lucky we did this, because we took 100,000 orders on the first day. 

[17:14] [audience laughs]

[eben]: So the answer to our question was '15 minutes'. Which was nice.

So, we're a year in. We sold our millionth Raspberry Pi at some point last month.

[17:30] [applause]
